
--- Page 1 ---
Evidencing Software in The Final Report 
As part of the Final Report, you are required to include source code for any software you write 
or modify as an appendix item (Page 10, 3rd Year Individual Project Handbook). 
It is likely that code will become many pages which is difficult to inspect when converted to a 
document format.  Moreover, for others to use and adapt your code it is a hurdle to convert 
this back into a useful format.  Therefore, rather than copy code into a text document, it is 
recommended to link to a suitable code repository, hosted by services such as GitHub, 
Bitbucket, GitLab etc. 
Instead of including all the source code, include a short description of the code (known as a 
readme) and a link to the code which is held online and made publically available. 
 
What is Repo (Repository)? 
A repo is a project space where all code can be neatly organised.  Typically, on your machine, 
this is a single directory where all your code is stored. 
 
What is GitHub? 
GitHub et al., are online backup spaces for your repos.  You can easily keep them updated, 
copy your project to a different machine to edit, or collaborate and share code with others. 
 
What is Git? 
Git is a type of Version Control.  It allows you to take snapshots of your code when it works.  
You can then build upon your code without the fear of it breaking things, simply roll back to 
your previous working snapshot.  No more “mycode_final_v2_WORKS.py”, just “mycode.py”. 
Git tracks changes to your code or documents.  You then make “commits” which saves the 
state of your repository along with a short comment message.  Typically, you would make 
commits when you get a new feature working or fix an issue. 
You don’t need GitHub to use Git, but GitHub allows you to have a backup online for you or 
others to access (rather than just being held on your local machine).  There are lots of useful 
articles and videos about using Git/GitHub, a good place to start is the video How Git Works: 
Explained in 4 Minutes. 
 
 
 

--- Page 2 ---
What Do I Need to Provide in the Final Report? 
If you wish to share your repo rather than copy code verbatim, for each repo you should 
provide the following: 
• 
Link to the repo (and for the repo to be publically available) 
• 
A copy of the readme text 
Each repo has a “readme” file, usually written using markdown format (file extension .md).  It 
should have some key sections: 
1. Title 
2. Introduction 
(1-2 paragraphs) 
3. Diagram/image/video/demo to add context 
4. User Installation Instructions 
(assume someone starting from scratch, step by step, including any other software) 
5. How to run the code, a simple example or demo code 
(Once again, assume someone with no prior knowledge) 
6. More technical details 
(for example any underlying equations you may have used) 
7. Known Issues/Future Improvements 
(for others or your future self to fix later) 
The formatting may or may not be kept when copying across, but ensure that the readme is 
still legible.  An example is shown below from a publically available research repo.  It shows 
that the readme can take up many pages, let alone the code itself! 
 
 
 

--- Page 3 ---
Radiation Costmap Plugin 
https://github.com/EEEManchester/radiation_layer 
Overview 
Ionising radiation can damage electronics and materials of robot platforms. To increase the lifetime of 
robotic systems deployed in environments with high levels of ionising radiation, minimisation of 
exposure is critical. Avoidance of radiation is also important to limit the amount of cross 
contamination which may occur from wheels, tracks or propeller wash picking up and transporting 
loose powdered radioactive material. 
The existing ROS navigation stack allows for occupancy grid representations of hazards (such 
as obstacles) or objects of interest (such as people). Path planners can use this occupancy grid for 
optimal planning whilst avoiding obstacles, based on total cost. 
This plugin allows for additional layers of the stock ROS costmap_2d implementation to be added 
based on data from radiation instrumentation. The cost associated with radiation levels can be scaled 
on an ad hoc basis. 
Referencing 
This work is described in the paper: 
Andrew West, Thomas Wright, Ioannis Tsitsimpelis, Keir Groves, Malcolm J. Joyce, and Barry Lennox. 
2022. “Real-Time Avoidance of Ionising Radiation Using Layered Costmaps for Mobile Robots.” 
Frontiers in Robotics and AI 9 (March). https://doi.org/10.3389/frobt.2022.862067. 
Installation 
This package has dependency on the radiation_msgs package, and this must be installed first: 
cd catkin_ws/src 
git clone https://github.com/EEEManchester/radiation_msgs.git 
cd .. 
catkin_make 
 
Once the radiation_msgs package is installed, to build from this repo, clone the latest version from this 
repository into your catkin workspace and compile using: 
 
cd catkin_ws/src 
git clone -b melodic https://github.com/EEEManchester/radiation_layer.git 
cd .. 
catkin_make 
 
This package is intended to be used with the ROS costmap_2D package from the navigation stack, 
therefore, this package will also need to be installed. However, this is likely already installed on your 
system. 
 
 

--- Page 4 ---
How it works 
The plugin layer subscribes to a stamped topic representing ionising radiation, and parses the location 
(using TF) and intensity of radiation to a cost on the costmap. The radiation layer operates at the same 
resolution and size as the main costmap, or defined in a yaml file. 
The average radiation value at each costmap cell is maintained, even when the costmap is resized. 
Radiation value can be any units or scale (e.g. counts per second, Sv/hr), as the actual cost is 
calculated based on upper and lower thresholds. Using thresholds allows for the robot to ignore areas 
of low radiation (e.g. background levels), and completely avoid areas with elevated radiation (e.g. high 
enough to immediately cause an electronic fault). 
Cost in each cell ranges from 0 (free space - robot can travel with no penalty) to 252 (highest cost for 
a non-lethal obstacle), and therefore the average radiation value is scaled linearly between 0-252 
based on: 
cost = 252 * (radiation_value - lower_threshold) / (upper_threshold - lower_threshold) 
 
The upper and lower thresholds are managed by the user, and can be changed at any time through 
use of dynamically reconfigurable parameters. 
When the costmap is resized, all the averaged radiation values on a per grid cell basis are temporarily 
stored, then the costmap is repopulated once the costmap has been expanded. In the event that the 
threshold values are altered (and therefore the cost 0-252 has changed), the entire plugin layer cost is 
recalculated and sent out to the rest of the costmap. 
Running an example 
Once the package is installed, the example launch file can be run using: 
roslaunch radiation_layer costmap_demonstrator.launch 
 
This will start RVIZ for visualisation, a node to publish radiation data (mimicking a robot driving 
around a radioactive environment) and a costmap_2d node with the radiation_layer plugin. The 
costmap_2d node also listens to a map produced by SLAM (provided by the map_server). 
The launch file will also start the rqt_reconfigure GUI (accessible via): 
rosrun rqt_reconfigure rqt_reconfigure 
 
The dynamically reconfigurable options can be changed by the user in real-time. These parameters 
can be modified by other ROS nodes (allowing for autonomous re-weighting of cost). Check out how 
to setup a dynamic reconfigure client here. 
In this example, the range of published radiation values are floating point values between 0-1000, with 
default lower threshold = 1, and upper_threshold = 200, i.e. values above 200 will be set at lethal 
obstacles. For the local and global costmaps, these have been set in the launch file or yaml file as 
examples of how to set this manually. Radiation information is conveyed using the 
radiation_msgs/DoseRate type. 

--- Page 5 ---
Dynamic Reconfigure Parameters 
The plugin can be enabled and disabled using the enable functionality, the plugin layer will continue 
to process radiation data and perform averaging but no additional cost will be added to the costmap. 
Behaviour of a robot with respect to radiation can be easily switched on and off using this enable 
functionality. 
To accommodate the wide range of values and units of measuring radiation (for example 300 counts 
per second may be equivalent to 1 nSv/hr), the lower and upper thresholds consist of a double value 
(between -999 and 999) and a power multiplier. For example to set an upper threshold of 1000 units, 
the value would be set to 1 and the mulitplier to kilo (3), i.e. one with three zeros. 
Settings for Different Radiation Types 
Alpha and Beta 
Alpha and Beta radiation have short path lengths, therefore are typically only observed in close 
proximity to a source. It can be assumed, most of the time, that sources of Alpha and Beta can be 
treated as highly localised. 
Therefore, it is better to only use the footprint of the detector, e.g. a paddle sensor, for 
inflation/adding cost to the costmap. Furthermore, the user can set the averaging_scale_length = 
0.0, and no distance weighting is applied. This may be a more reliable approach when twinned with 
avoidance strategies. 
Gamma 
As gamma radiation changes on larger length scales, interpolation can happen at sizes greater than 
the detector volume. To have a robot sucessfullly avoid radiation, this enlarged interpolation area 
should be larger than the robot. Tuning of this value is discussed in the journal article. Furthermore, 
distance weighted averaging is then also encouraged to help build more realistic maps. 
Neutrons 
Neutrons are likely to have scale lengths more akin to Gamma radiation transport, certainly further 
than Alpha or Beta radiation, therefore, it is best to treat them similarly to gamma radiation using 
distance weighted interpolation. 
Bugs & Feature Requests 
Please report bugs and request features using the Issue Tracker. 
